DOC Good practices and pitfalls for random_state (#18363)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/computing/randomness.rst

.. Places parent toc into the sidebar

:parenttoc: True

.. _randomness:

Controlling randomness: good practices and common pitfalls
==========================================================

Some scikit-learn objects are inherently random. These are usually estimators
(e.g. :class:`~sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`) and cross-validation
splitters (e.g. :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`). The randomness of
these objects is controlled via their `random_state` parameter, as described
in the :term:`Glossary <random_state>`. This section expands on the glossary
entry, and describes good practice and common pitfalls w.r.t. to this
subtle parameter.

The `random_state` parameter determines whether multiple calls to :term:`fit`
(for estimators) or to :term:`split` (for cv spliters) will produce the same
results, according to these rules:

- If an int is passed, calling `fit()` or `split()` multiple times yields the
  same results.
- If `None` or a `RandomState` instance is passed: `fit()` and `split()` will
  yield different results each time they are called, producing an event chain

>   of maximal entropy. `None` is the default value for all `random_state`

Reviewer: I do not know if "event chain of maximal entropy" is commonly used.

Reviewer 2: entropy -> variability?

basically fixing a state in one place reduces one source of variance in the execution.

>   of maximal entropy. `None` is the default value for all `random_state`

Reviewer: Is "event chain of maximal entropy" commonly used?

Author: I'm not sure either... I took that from @GaelVaroquaux . Gael could you comment / suggest an alternative?

  parameters.

  .. note::
      Since passing `random_state=None` is equivalent to passing the global
      `RandomState` instance from `numpy`
      (`random_state=np.random.mtrand._rand`), we will not explicitly mention
      `None` here, but everything that applies to instances also applies to
      using `None`.

.. warning:: TLDR

    Unless you know what you are doing, we strongly recommend to use integers
    as the `random_state` parameter of estimators and cv splitters. Leaving
    the default (`None`) or using `RandomState` instances is sometimes

>     useful, but can have surprising effects.

Reviewer: Having defaults be something we do not recommend is suggesting that we should make the default an int.

Author: Yeah...

My conclusion from that is not that we should change the default (it would actually not solve most issues), but rather that we should prevent those issues from happening by changing how we handle `random_state`.

understand how these procedure differ.

.. note::
    Here, :func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` will use a
    non-randomized cv splitter (as is the default), so both estimators will
    be evaluated on the same splits. Also, whether we pass an int or an
    instance to :func:`~sklearn.datasets.make_classification` isn't relevant
    for our illustration purpose: what matters is what we pass to the
    :class:`~sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier` estimator.

Another subtle side effect of passing `RandomState` instances is how
:func:`~sklearn.clone` will work::

    >>> from sklearn import clone
    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    >>> a = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=rng)
    >>> b = clone(a)

Since a `RandomState` instance was passed to `a`, `a` and `b` are not clones
in the strict sense, but rather clones in the statistical sense: `a` and `b`
will still be different models, even after calling `fit(X, y)` on the same
data. Moreover, `a` and `b` will influence each-other since they share the
same internal RNG: calling `a.fit()` will consume `b`'s RNG, and calling

> `b.fit()` will consume `a`'s RNG, since they are the same.

Reviewer: Mutable objects in `__init__` lead to so many side effects.

    [0.85 0.95 0.9  0.95 0.95]
    [0.85 0.7  0.95 0.8  0.85]

Directly comparing the performance of the random forest vs the gradient
boosting estimator would be a methodological mistake: **the splits on which
the estimators are evaluated are different**. Indeed,
:func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` will internally call
`cv.split()` on the same :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold` instance,
but the splits will be different each time. This is relevant for any tool
that performs model selection via cross-validation, including
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.GridSearchCV` and
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.RandomizedSearchCV`.

For comparable results, one should pass an int to
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`: `KFold(shuffle=True,
random_state=0)`.

.. note::
    What matters in this example is what was passed to
    :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`. Whether we pass a `RandomState`
    instance or an int to :func:`~sklearn.datasets.make_classification` or to
    the estimators is not relevant for our illustration purpose. It does
    however have an impact on the cross-validation procedure as explained

>     above, but it isn't what makes the comparison incorect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    above, but it isn't what makes the comparison incorrect.
```

splitters (e.g. :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`). The randomness of
these objects is controlled via their `random_state` parameter, as described
in the :term:`Glossary <random_state>`. This section expands on the glossary
entry, and describes good practice and common pitfalls w.r.t. to this
subtle parameter.

The `random_state` parameter determines whether multiple calls to :term:`fit`
(for estimators) or to :term:`split` (for cv spliters) will produce the same
results, according to these rules:

- If an int is passed, calling `fit()` or `split()` multiple times yields the
  same results.
- If `None` or a `RandomState` instance is passed: `fit()` and `split()` will
  yield different results each time they are called, producing an event chain
  of maximal entropy. `None` is the default value for all `random_state`
  parameters.

  .. note::
      Since passing `random_state=None` is equivalent to passing the global
      `RandomState` instance from `numpy`
      (`random_state=np.random.mtrand._rand`), we will not explicitly mention
      `None` here, but everything that applies to instances also applies to
      using `None`.

.. warning:: TLDR

>     Unless you know what you are doing, we strongly recommend to use integers
>     as the `random_state` parameter of estimators and cv splitters. Leaving
>     the default (`None`) or using `RandomState` instances is sometimes
>     useful, but can have surprising effects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    By passing integers as the `random_state` parameter of estimators and cv splitters
    makes your code more reproducible and allows you to isolate sources of variance
    in your analysis. It can therefore be recommended and be seen as a good practice.
    This however can hide random effects that are desirable to assess statistical
    significance of your results. This explains why the default (`None`) or using
    `RandomState` instances is sometimes useful, but can have surprising effects.
```

Getting reproducible results across multiple executions
-------------------------------------------------------

In order to obtain reproducible (i.e. constant) results across multiple
program executions, the easiest way is to set a `rng` variable to an
integer value at the top of your program, and pass it down to any object that
accepts a `random_state` parameter::

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

>     >>> rng = 0  # or any other integer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    >>> rng = 42  # or any other integer
```
;)

We do not recommend either setting the global `numpy` seed by calling
`np.random.seed(0)`. See `here
<https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5836335/consistently-create-same-random-numpy-array/5837352#comment6712034_5837352>`_
for a discussion.

Using None or `RandomState` instances
-------------------------------------

Estimators
..........

As described above, passing instances means that calling `fit()` multiple
times will not yield the same results, even if the estimator is fitted on the
same data, with the same hyper-parameters::

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=rng)
    >>> rf = RandomForestClassifier(max_features=2, max_samples=10,
    ...                             random_state=rng)
    >>> X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
    ...     X, y, random_state=rng)
    >>> rf.fit(X_train, y_train).score(X_test, y_test)
    0.76
    >>> rf.fit(X_train, y_train).score(X_test, y_test)
    0.8

> .. note::
>     `score()` is not a random procedure. Only `fit()` has randomness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note::
    Limiting variability in the above score can typically done by increasing
    the number of samples or here by using more trees in the forest.
    The more you have data the more you can trust your results.

.. note::
    `score()` is not a random procedure. Only `fit()` has randomness.
```

object become somewhat inter-dependent. For example, two estimator that share
the same `RandomState` instance will influence each-other, as we will see
later when we discuss cloning.

If we had passed an int to the `random_state` parameter of the
:class:`~sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`, we would have obtained the
same models, and thus the same scores each time. When we pass an int, the
same RNG is used across all calls to `fit()`. What internally happens is that
even though the RNG is consumed when `fit()` is called, it is always reset to
its original state at the beginning of `fit()`.

CV splitters
............

Randomized cv splitters have a similar behavior when a `RandomState`
instance is passed::

    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import KFold
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> X = np.arange(10)
    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    >>> cv = KFold(n_splits=2, shuffle=True, random_state=rng)
    >>> for train, test in cv.split(X):
    ...     print(train, test)
    [0 3 5 6 7] [1 2 4 8 9]
    [1 2 4 8 9] [0 3 5 6 7]
    >>> for train, test in cv.split(X):
    ...     print(train, test)
    [0 4 6 7 8] [1 2 3 5 9]
    [1 2 3 5 9] [0 4 6 7 8]

> We can see that the splits are different from the second time `split()` is
> called. This may lead to wrong results if you compare the performance of
> multiple estimators by calling `split()` many times: the estimators will not
> be evaluated on the same folds, and performances will not be comparable.
> Using an int is usually much safer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can see that the splits are different from the second time `split()` is
called. This may lead to unexpected results if you compare the performance of
multiple estimators by calling `split()` many times: the estimators will not
be evaluated on the same folds, and scores of each fold will not be comparable.
On average, if enough folds are used, one can however expect that that mean
score allows to conclude if one estimator is better than another.
Using an int makes possible score comparisons across folds.
```

Author: Would you say that the default (5 folds) is enough so that the average score is still meaningful?

Reviewer 2: it depends on the size of the data. It's a good textbook default.

that accept non-fitted estimators will in fact call :func:`~sklearn.clone`
internally (:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.GridSearchCV`,
:class:`~sklearn.ensemble.StackingClassifier`,
:class:`~sklearn.calibration.CalibratedClassifierCV`, etc.).

CV splitters
............

When passed a `RandomState` instance, cv splitters yield different splits
each time `split()` is called. This can lead to dramatic mistakes when
comparing the performance of different estimators::

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import KFold
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> 
    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=rng)
    >>> rf = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=rng)
    >>> gbdt = GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=rng)
    >>> cv = KFold(shuffle=True, random_state=rng)
    >>> for est in (rf, gbdt):
    ...     print(cross_val_score(est, X, y, cv=cv))
    [0.85 0.95 0.9  0.95 0.95]
    [0.85 0.7  0.95 0.8  0.85]

> Directly comparing the performance of the random forest vs the gradient
> boosting estimator would be a methodological mistake: **the splits on which
> the estimators are evaluated are different**. Indeed,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Concluding that the performance of the random forest or the gradient
boosting estimator is better by counting how many times one model
is better than the other across folds would be a methodological mistake:
**the splits on which the estimators are evaluated are different**. Indeed,
```

:func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` will internally call
`cv.split()` on the same :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold` instance,

> but the splits will be different each time. This is relevant for any tool
> that performs model selection via cross-validation, including
> :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.GridSearchCV` and
> :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.RandomizedSearchCV`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but the splits will be different each time. When using tools
that performs model selection via cross-validation, including
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.GridSearchCV` and
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.RandomizedSearchCV`,
you need to understand that variance of scores between parameters
is the combination of cross-validation variance and estimation
variance. The principled way to limit the cross-validation variance
is to use more folds, at the expense of running time. The more
you have data the less this actually is a problem as variance
will automatically be reduced.
```

> For comparable results, one should pass an int to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more immediate comparison of results, one should pass an int to
```

:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`: `KFold(shuffle=True,
random_state=0)`.

.. note::

>     What matters in this example is what was passed to
>     :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`. Whether we pass a `RandomState`
>     instance or an int to :func:`~sklearn.datasets.make_classification` or to
>     the estimators is not relevant for our illustration purpose. It does
>     however have an impact on the cross-validation procedure as explained
>     above, but it isn't what makes the comparison incorrect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    What matters in this example is what was passed to
    :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`. Whether we pass a `RandomState`
    instance or an int to :func:`~sklearn.datasets.make_classification` or to
    the estimators is not relevant for our illustration purpose. It does
    however have an impact on the cross-validation procedure as explained
    above.
```

.. Places parent toc into the sidebar

:parenttoc: True

.. _randomness:

Controlling randomness: good practices and common pitfalls
==========================================================

Some scikit-learn objects are inherently random. These are usually estimators
(e.g. :class:`~sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`) and cross-validation
splitters (e.g. :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`). The randomness of
these objects is controlled via their `random_state` parameter, as described
in the :term:`Glossary <random_state>`. This section expands on the glossary
entry, and describes good practice and common pitfalls w.r.t. to this
subtle parameter.

The `random_state` parameter determines whether multiple calls to :term:`fit`
(for estimators) or to :term:`split` (for cv spliters) will produce the same
results, according to these rules:

> - If an int is passed, calling `fit()` or `split()` multiple times yields the

Author: ok

  same results.

> - If `None` or a `RandomState` instance is passed: `fit()` and `split()` will
>   yield different results each time they are called, producing an event chain

Reviewer 4: We say in lines 69-76 that a `RandomState` instance would give us reproducible results across executions (with possible surprising and unwanted effects).

Maybe, to avoid confusion, we could omit `RandomState` instance here.

```suggestion
- If `None` is passed,`fit` and `split` will yield different
   results each time they are called, producing an event chain
```

Author: I don't think we want to omit instances here, the whole guide is about instances. Also the section below is about reproducible results across executions, which is a different thing from getting constant results across calls to fit / split

  of maximal entropy. `None` is the default value for all `random_state`
  parameters.

  .. note::
      Since passing `random_state=None` is equivalent to passing the global
      `RandomState` instance from `numpy`
      (`random_state=np.random.mtrand._rand`), we will not explicitly mention
      `None` here, but everything that applies to instances also applies to
      using `None`.

.. warning:: TLDR

    Unless you know what you are doing, we recommend to use integers as the
    `random_state` parameter of estimators and cv splitters, as it is usually
    the safest option and it allows you to isolate different sources of
    variance in your analysis. Leaving the default (`None`) or using
    `RandomState` instances is sometimes useful to assess to statistical

>     significance of your results, but can also have surprising effects.

Reviewer 2: +1 on the fact that it depends on what you claim when reporting results

.. Places parent toc into the sidebar

:parenttoc: True

.. _randomness:

Controlling randomness: good practices and common pitfalls
==========================================================

Some scikit-learn objects are inherently random. These are usually estimators
(e.g. :class:`~sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`) and cross-validation
splitters (e.g. :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`). The randomness of
these objects is controlled via their `random_state` parameter, as described
in the :term:`Glossary <random_state>`. This section expands on the glossary
entry, and describes good practice and common pitfalls w.r.t. to this

> subtle parameter.

Author: I think I'd rather leave this. It really is a subtle parameter IMO, and users should be careful with it

The `random_state` parameter determines whether multiple calls to :term:`fit`
(for estimators) or to :term:`split` (for cv splitters) will produce the same
results, according to these rules:

- If an int is passed, calling `fit` or `split` multiple times yields the
  same results.
- If `None` or a `RandomState` instance is passed: `fit` and `split` will
  yield different results each time they are called, producing an event chain
  of maximal entropy. `None` is the default value for all `random_state`
  parameters.

  .. note::
      Since passing `random_state=None` is equivalent to passing the global
      `RandomState` instance from `numpy`
      (`random_state=np.random.mtrand._rand`), we will not explicitly mention
      `None` here, but everything that applies to instances also applies to

>       using `None`.

Author: I can't find it either, it really is a private numpy object. I think the link your provided is about Generators vs RandomState: numpy has a new `Generator` object to deal with RNGs, on top of `RandomState`. But we don't support it.

> .. warning:: TL;DR

Reviewer 5: Is the TL;DR really suitable here? I'm expecting it in a blog post not in a documentation ... maybe I'm just old... :)

Author: I think it lost its sarcastic connotation but I can replace with just "Recommendation summary" or something like that?

    Unless you know what you are doing, we recommend to use integers as the
    `random_state` parameter of estimators and cv splitters, as it is usually
    the safest option and it allows you to isolate different sources of
    variance in your analysis. Leaving the default (`None`) or using
    `RandomState` instances is sometimes useful to assess to statistical
    significance of your results, but can also have surprising effects.

Getting reproducible results across multiple executions
-------------------------------------------------------

In order to obtain reproducible (i.e. constant) results across multiple
program executions, the easiest way is to set a `rng` variable to an
integer value at the top of your program, and pass it down to any object that

> accepts a `random_state` parameter::

Reviewer 6: I found it slightly confusing for this variable to be named `rng` for a few reasons:

- At first, I thought it was short for "range", which seemed like a strange name for an integer.
- Then, I realized it stood for "random number generator", which also seemed strange since this integer is not doing any "generation". (However, it seems like a good variable name for a RandomState instance.)
- Finally, I found it distracting to keep track of whether `rng` referred to an integer or a RandomState instance throughout the rest of the page.

That is all to say that I would suggest using a different name for this particular variable (not sure what) when it refers to an integer, but keep using `rng` as the variable that refers to a RandomState instance.

However, you should definitely ignore my suggestion if using the name "rng" is already a widely adopted convention for this variable.

Author: thanks for the comment. Indeed I think `rng`  is  a pretty common name (it is at least used everywhere in our code base). I hope that explicitly mentioning the acronym at the first occurrence will help avoid confusion

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

    >>> rng = 42  # or any other integer
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=rng)
    >>> rf = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=rng)
    >>> X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y,
    ...                                                     random_state=rng)
    >>> rf.fit(X_train, y_train).score(X_test, y_test)
    0.88

We are now guaranteed that the result of this script will always be 0.88, no
matter how many times we run it. Changing the global `rng` variable to a
different value should affect the results, as expected.

We could have used a `RandomState` instance instead of an integer::

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)

This too would give us reproducible results across executions. However, using
`RandomState` instances may have surprising and unwanted effects that will be
described later.

> We do not recommend either setting the global `numpy` seed by calling

Reviewer 6: It would be slightly more clear to say "We also do not recommend setting..."

`np.random.seed(0)`. See `here

> <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5836335/consistently-create-same-random-numpy-array/5837352#comment6712034_5837352>`_

Reviewer 7: you could also add the link of NEP 19 on numpy random generators https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0019-rng-policy.html#numpy-random. Although we might not want to confuse users with the new numpy random API as it is not yet used in scikit-learn.

Author: Thanks @albertcthomas . Yes I'm afraid linking to the SLEP might confuse users further since it's about Generators, and since they recommend passing RandomState instances (things are more subtle for us)

for a discussion.

Using None or `RandomState` instances
-------------------------------------

Estimators
..........

As described above, passing instances means that calling `fit` multiple
times will not yield the same results, even if the estimator is fitted on the
same data, with the same hyper-parameters::

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=rng)
    >>> rf = RandomForestClassifier(max_features=2, max_samples=10,
    ...                             random_state=rng)
    >>> X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y,
    ...                                                     random_state=rng)

    >>> rf.fit(X_train, y_train).score(X_test, y_test)
    0.76
    >>> rf.fit(X_train, y_train).score(X_test, y_test)
    0.8

.. note::

>     `score()` is not a random procedure. Only `fit` has randomness.

Reviewer 6: It might be worth clarifying that fit has randomness only for some models and not others. If someone was scanning the page and read this sentence in isolation, they might conclude that the fit method always has randomness.

We can see from the snippet above that `rf.fit` has produced different

> models, even if the data was the same. This is because the RNG of the

Reviewer 6: Since this is the first time "RNG" is being used on this page, it would be useful to clarify that it stands for "Random Number Generator".

> models, even if the data was the same. This is because the RNG of the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
models, even if the data was the same. This is because the random number generator (RNG) of the
```

> estimator is consumed when `fit` is called, and this consumed (mutaded) RNG

Reviewer 6: I think this should be "mutated"

> estimator is consumed when `fit` is called, and this consumed (mutaded) RNG

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
estimator is consumed when `fit` is called, and this consumed (mutated) RNG
```

will be used in the subsequent calls to `fit`. In addition, the `rng`
object is shared across any object that uses it, and as a consequence, these
object become somewhat inter-dependent. For example, two estimator that share

> the same `RandomState` instance will influence each-other, as we will see

Reviewer 6: I think this should be "estimators" (plural), and remove the dash from "each other".

    >>> cv = KFold(n_splits=2, shuffle=True, random_state=rng)
    >>> for train, test in cv.split(X):
    ...     print(train, test)
    [0 3 5 6 7] [1 2 4 8 9]
    [1 2 4 8 9] [0 3 5 6 7]
    >>> for train, test in cv.split(X):
    ...     print(train, test)
    [0 4 6 7 8] [1 2 3 5 9]
    [1 2 3 5 9] [0 4 6 7 8]

We can see that the splits are different from the second time `split` is
called. This may lead to unexpected results if you compare the performance of
multiple estimators by calling `split` many times: the estimators will not
be evaluated on the same folds, and the scores on each fold will not be
comparable. On average, if enough folds are used and with enough data, one
can however expect that that mean score allows to conclude whether one
estimator is better than another. In any case, passing an int makes score
comparisons across folds meaningful, and is usually safer.

Common pitfalls and subtleties
------------------------------

While the rules that govern the `random_state` parameter are seemingly simple,
they do however have some subtle implications. In some cases, this can even
lead to wrong conclusions.

Estimators
..........

> **Differences in cross-validation procedures**

Reviewer 8: I wonder whether the right way of explaining this is no to explain what is measured by a given evaluation procedure.

* A cross-validation procedure is used to measure the risk associated to the procedure of 1) training a model on given data, 2) applying it to new data.

* A train-test split (or train-test-validation split) will measure the risk associated to a given trained model.

(I realize that we could add the distinction above in the model selection section).

In the second case, it makes sense to use an integer seed, as you may want to control fully how the trained model is built. In the first case, it makes little sense.

    >>> rf_inst = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=np.random.RandomState(0))
    >>> cross_val_score(rf_inst, X, y)
    array([0.9 , 0.95, 0.95, 0.9 , 0.9 ])

    >>> rf_123 = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=123)
    >>> cross_val_score(rf_123, X, y)
    array([0.85, 0.95, 0.95, 0.9 , 0.9 ])

We see that the cross-validated scores of `rf_inst` and `rf_123` are
different, as should be expected since we didn't pass the same `random_state`
parameter. However, the difference between these scores is more subtle that
it may look, and **the cross-validation procedures that were performed by**
:func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` **significantly differ in
each case**:

- Since `rf_123` was passed an int, every call to `fit` uses the same RNG:
  the same (random) subset of features will be used across all folds to fit
  the random forest.
- Since `rf_inst` was passed a `RandomState` instance, each call to `fit`
  starts from a different RNG, and the randomly sampled subset of features
  will be different for each of the 5 folds of the CV procedure.

Here, neither procedure is inherently wrong, and one might prefer one over

> the other depending on the task at hand. It is however important to

Reviewer 8: Here, I would loop back to the comment that I made above:

1) to evaluate a training procedure, seeds shouldn't be fixed (because what is a good seed in a given situation may be a bad one in another situation)

2) in a train-test split, to evaluate a trained model, it can be useful to fix the seed.

understand how these procedures differ.

.. note::
    Here, :func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` will use a
    non-randomized cv splitter (as is the default), so both estimators will
    be evaluated on the same splits. Also, whether we pass an int or an
    instance to :func:`~sklearn.datasets.make_classification` isn't relevant

>     for our illustration purpose: what matters is what we pass to the

Author: We do need to pass a random_state to `make_classification`: if we don't , the scores/splits will be different each time the docs are built and CI would complain

    >>> b = clone(a)

Since a `RandomState` instance was passed to `a`, `a` and `b` are not clones
in the strict sense, but rather clones in the statistical sense: `a` and `b`
will still be different models, even after calling `fit(X, y)` on the same
data. Moreover, `a` and `b` will influence each-other since they share the
same internal RNG: calling `a.fit` will consume `b`'s RNG, and calling
`b.fit` will consume `a`'s RNG, since they are the same. This is true for
any estimators that share a `random_state` parameter; it is not specific to
clones.

If an int were passed, `a` and `b` would be exact clones and they would not
influence each other.

This is an important thing to remember because :func:`~sklearn.clone` is
called everywhere in scikit-learn tools: in particular, most meta-estimators
that accept non-fitted estimators will in fact call :func:`~sklearn.clone`
internally (:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.GridSearchCV`,
:class:`~sklearn.ensemble.StackingClassifier`,
:class:`~sklearn.calibration.CalibratedClassifierCV`, etc.).

CV splitters
............

When passed a `RandomState` instance, cv splitters yield different splits

> each time `split` is called. This can lead to dramatic mistakes when

Reviewer 8: Not dramatic mistakes, I disagree. The expectation of the performance of the estimator is correct.
```suggestion
each time `split` is called. This can lead to overestimate the variance of the difference in performance between estimator.
```

comparing the performance of different estimators::

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import KFold
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=rng)
    >>> rf = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=rng)

>     >>> gbdt = GradientBoostingClassifier(random_state=rng)

Reviewer 8: Maybe the most visible way of illustrating the problem would be to use twice the same estimator, and a deterministic one (eg a naive bayes), to make the difference more obvious.

    >>> cv = KFold(shuffle=True, random_state=rng)

    >>> for est in (rf, gbdt):
    ...     print(cross_val_score(est, X, y, cv=cv))
    [0.85 0.95 0.9  0.95 0.95]
    [0.85 0.7  0.95 0.8  0.85]

Directly comparing the performance of the random forest vs the gradient
boosting estimator on each fold would be a methodological mistake: **the
splits on which the estimators are evaluated are different**. Indeed,
:func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` will internally call
`cv.split` on the same :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold` instance,
but the splits will be different each time. This is also true for any tool
that performs model selection via cross-validation, e.g.
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.GridSearchCV` and
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.RandomizedSearchCV`: scores are not
comparable fold-to-fold across different calls to `search.fit`, since
`cv.split` would have been called multiple times. Within a single call to
`search.fit`, however, fold-to-fold comparison is possible since the search

> estimator only calls `cv.split` once.

Reviewer 8: This paragraph lacks nuance: the estimate of the performance of the two estimators are still unbiased, they just have an uncontrolled variance. The error would be to substract one list to the other.

Author: I'm not sure what to do here: bias isn't the topic of this paragraph. We discuss these things below I believe.

Reviewer 8: To be more direct: it is not a mistake to compare the performance of the two models, because this comparison is on expectation correct. The paragraph above implies that it is.

What would be a mistake would be to perform a paired test, in other words comparing each entry of one list to the corresponding entry of the other. However the only difference between comparing entries one to one and comparing the mean is the variance, and the problem of estimating the variance of the error from a cross-validation procedure is an unsolved one.

Author: I think this paragraph was updated since the time you first commented on it. Specifically, it's now clear IMHO that what we say is that:

- fold-to-fold comparison is a mistake
- comparing average scores is OK as long as there are enough folds and data.

Could you double check?

Reviewer 8: OK, I missed the "on each fold" above. Maybe we should put it in bold.

For comparable fold-to-fold results in all scenarios, one should pass an int
to the CV plitter: `KFold(shuffle=True, random_state=0)`.

.. note::
    What matters in this example is what was passed to
    :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.KFold`. Whether we pass a `RandomState`
    instance or an int to :func:`~sklearn.datasets.make_classification` or to
    the estimators is not relevant for our illustration purpose. It does
    however have an impact on the cross-validation procedure as explained

>     above, but it isn't what makes the fold-to-fold comparison incorrect.

Reviewer 5: As above, I find this note more 'distracting' than helpful to understand. `make_classification` can be called without `random_state` and the two estimators in a deterministic way, then the note becomes unnecessary.

.. note::
    When evaluating scores via cross-validation, it is important to
    understand that the variance of scores between candidates may come from
    different sources: the cross-validation variance, and the estimation
    variance. The principled way to limit the cross-validation variance is to
    use more folds, at the expense of running time. The more data you have,
    the less this actually is a problem as variance will automatically be
    reduced. Limiting estimation variance is estimator-dependent, but here

>     well, more data helps reducing the variance.

Reviewer 8: +1

they do however have some subtle implications. In some cases, this can even
lead to wrong conclusions.

Estimators
..........

**Different `random_state` types lead to different cross-validation
procedures**

Depending on the type of the `random_state` parameter, estimators will behave
differently, especially in cross-validation procedures. Consider the
following snippet::

    >>> from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=0)

    >>> rf_123 = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=123)
    >>> cross_val_score(rf_123, X, y)
    array([0.85, 0.95, 0.95, 0.9 , 0.9 ])

    >>> rf_inst = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=np.random.RandomState(0))
    >>> cross_val_score(rf_inst, X, y)
    array([0.9 , 0.95, 0.95, 0.9 , 0.9 ])

We see that the cross-validated scores of `rf_123` and `rf_inst` are
different, as should be expected since we didn't pass the same `random_state`
parameter. However, the difference between these scores is more subtle than

> it looks, and **the cross-validation procedures that were performed by**
> :func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` **significantly differ in

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
it looks, and **the cross-validation splits that were performed by**
:func:`~sklearn.model_selection.cross_val_score` **differ in
```

Author: I'm not sure I agree with the suggested change, because the splits are the same in this code snippet. What differs is the cross-validation procedure, as described just below.

Reviewer 8: Yes, you are right. Brain fart, my mistake.

each case**:

- Since `rf_123` was passed an integer, every call to `fit` uses the same RNG:
  this means that all random characteristics of the random forest estimator
  will be the same for each of the 5 folds of the CV procedure. In
  particular, the (randomly chosen) subset of features of the estimator will
  be the same across all folds.
- Since `rf_inst` was passed a `RandomState` instance, each call to `fit`
  starts from a different RNG. As a result, the random subset of features
  will be different for each folds.

While having a constant estimator RNG across folds isn't inherently wrong,

> results are more significant if we allow the estimator RNG to vary for each
> fold, so passing an instance may be preferable (more on this later).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
results characterize best the learner if we allow the estimator RNG to vary for each
fold, hence passing an instance may be preferable (more on this later).
```
I would avoid the use of the terminology "significant", which requires specifying a null hypothesis.

Author: Ok, I'll use "robustness w.r.t. randomness" instead of significance.

    `np.random.seed(0)`. See `here
    <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5836335/consistently-create-same-random-numpy-array/5837352#comment6712034_5837352>`_
    for a discussion.

Significance of cross-validation results
........................................

When we evaluate a randomized estimator performance by cross-validation, we
want to make sure that the estimator can yield accurate predictions for new
data, but we also want to make sure that the estimator is robust w.r.t. its
random initialization. For example, we would like the random weights
initialization of a :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.SGDCLassifier` to be
consistently good across all folds: otherwise, when we train that estimator
on new data, we might get unlucky and the random initialization may lead to
bad performance. Similarly, we want a random forest to be robust w.r.t the
set of randomly selected features that each tree will be using.

For these reasons, it is preferable to evaluate the cross-validation
preformance by letting the estimator use a different RNG on each fold. This
is done by passing a `RandomState` instance (or None) to the estimator

> initialization.

Author: I think this reasoning actually breaks in `GridSearchCV`. For a given candidate, I agree that it is preferable to evaluate it with a different RNG on each fold. However, it seems to me that all candidates should be starting from the same RNG. Otherwise the best candidate might just be the one that had lucky seeds.

Basically:

Fold 0 : all candidates use the same RNG
fold 1 : all candidates use the same RNG (different RNG from fold 0)
etc...

`GridSearchCV` does not support that currently.

Thoughts @GaelVaroquaux ?

Reviewer 8: All it tells us is that some improvements in `GridSearchCV` will be due to chance. There's nothing that we can do about this, this is an intrinsic problem of hyper-parameter tuning and of statistics in general, not a breakage of `GridSearchCV`: when we get too close to the optimal, the results are as good as random (for many reasons, including the random choice of initialization and splitting, but also the sampling of the data).

For this reason, there used to be the "1 standard deviation rule", which is to take the simplest model out of all those within one standard deviation of the best (figure 3.7 of the elements of statistical learning, or https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/80268/empirical-justification-for-the-one-standard-error-rule-when-using-cross-validat). However this rule is really hard to code in a package like scikit-learn.

    :class:`~sklearn.ensemble.StackingClassifier`,
    :class:`~sklearn.calibration.CalibratedClassifierCV`, etc.).

CV splitters
............

When passed a `RandomState` instance, CV splitters yield different splits
each time `split` is called. When comparing different estimators, this can
lead to overestimating the variance of the difference in performance between
the estimators::

    >>> from sklearn.naive_bayes import GaussianNB
    >>> from sklearn.discriminant_analysis import LinearDiscriminantAnalysis
    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import KFold
    >>> from sklearn.model_selection import cross_val_score
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> rng = np.random.RandomState(0)
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=rng)
    >>> cv = KFold(shuffle=True, random_state=rng)
    >>> lda = LinearDiscriminantAnalysis()
    >>> nb = GaussianNB()

    >>> for est in (lda, nb):
    ...     print(cross_val_score(est, X, y, cv=cv))
    [0.8  0.75 0.75 0.7  0.85]
    [0.85 0.95 0.95 0.85 0.95]

Directly comparing the performance of the
:class:`~sklearn.discriminant_analysis.LinearDiscriminantAnalysis` estimator

> vs the :class:`~sklearn.naive_bayes.GaussianNB` estimator on each fold would

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
vs the :class:`~sklearn.naive_bayes.GaussianNB` estimator **on each fold** would
```
